---
layout: post
title: "Isaac Asimov's Universe Part 02"
description: "This Post continues from the height of the galactic empire and details the rise to power of the most awesome (fictional) mathematical organization ever. The Foundation. It's birth as a small world of scientists into a galactic superpower. "
category: SciFi
tags: [Science Fiction, Asimov]
image: "/images/asimov.jpg"
---


When i first read Asimov, it seemed to me (little kid though that i was) that there was something in what Asimov had imagined. A truth so simple that it boggled the imagination. The truth was that all great civilization die. Entropy is a force that acts on civilization as simply as if they were a battery source. Genghis Khan, once ruled the largest land empire ever known, and then his empire fell. The Greeks rose in philosophy ,arts and their military went all the way upto India but they fell under the might of Rome. Rome itself would fall soon later, followed by the rise of the church. The Vatican, which at one point had such a powerful political and militaristic structure gave way to the explorers and the rise of the European Colonies. But those fell too. Any organization, cannot last. The same way that  IBM and Yahoo who were once giants and now struggle against the onslaught of google and apple. 

Asimov hit upon this funda all those years ago. He wrote the rise a magnificent galactic empire. An Empire which ruled over 25 million worlds with utter equanimity. An empire which was built on Peace, prosperity and tolerance. And then he destroyed that empire. It destroyed itself out of sheer inertia.

## The Fall of Trantor

Trantor was the centre of the Empire. Located as close to the central black hole as habitably possible, it was world built completely of metal . It housed offices that was completely and utterly devoted to the administration of the Galaxy. At it's prime, it would receive tens of thousands of ships filled with food and those same ships would leave carrying the waste generated by the Planet.
The Galaxy was ruled by an Emperor. But he had no real power of course. He was a figurehead for the Empire. The Empire was the people that were the product of Trantor's universities, who were then administrators of their own worlds. The Empire was the military with senior commanders entrenched in the political intricacies of Trantor.
Such was how the empire ran, with it's self sustaining infrastructure. In some ways, it was completely doomed from the beginning.

## Psychohistory

Psychohistory was essentially the mathematical study of how human societies repond to economic and social stimuli. It could predict the behaviour of large groups of human social groups with astounding accuracy. 
Asimov modeled this on the kinetic theory of gases, where even though you cant predict the path that a single molecule of  air would take, you could still however study a large volume of gas as a system and statistically define how the gas system would react. You can derive the relationship that states that a volume of air that is warmer that its surroundings would rise above the relatively cold air. 
That is essence was psychohistory. It couldn't predict the behavior of a single human being, in fact it states that the actions of a single individual are irrelevant. However, looking at the quantizillion human beings that made up the galactic empire, psychohistory could make highly accurate probabilistic predictions of how these masses of humanity would react.

## Hari Seldon

Some people are special. Their names resound through history by virtue of the sheer revolutionary nature of the concepts they introduce. Hari Seldon was one such individial, like Einstein or Descartes or maybe like Jobs. 
He starts off as a mathematician who dealt with the chaos theory in turbulence, and got a wild idea that he would call psychohistory.
We see him (chronologically) in "Forward the Foundation", where he, as a young mathematican proposes this wild theory at a mathematical convention on Trantor. In the beginning  he claims that all the paper says is that psychohistorical predictions are possible, but not feasible (citing chaos theory as the main point of concern).
As he develops psychohistory, he realizes that the Empire is on a downward spiral. His math tells him that when the empire falls, it would lead to 30 thousand years of galactic anarchy before a second empire would rise from its ashes. 
He realizes that the fall is inevitable and cannot be averted, but using the mathematics that he invented, he designs a plan. A plan to reduce the period of barbarism to just a thousand years. This would forever change the course of humanity (although none would know it then). 
Of course, if you wanted to use the math to arrive at the stimuli that would result in the highest probability of the event that you wanted to happen, then the masses had to be unaware of the predictions of psychohistory. aware of nothing but its bare existence. 
And thus the Foundation was born.

## Foundation

The Foundation was a group of scholars who's true nature would only be known even to them 50 years after Seldon's death. Left on a small desolate world called Terminus, these encyclopediasists were tasked with the creation of an encyclopedia that would contain the sum total of humanity's technological and intellectual accomplishments over the millennium of barbarism. 
But, they were in fact following the Seldon Plan. The plan that entailed certain crisis's where Seldon's image would appear and guide them in the correct path that they should take. 
The Foundation novels are a series of short stories that let us see the early years of the foundation, how a small world located at the edge of the galaxy devoid of metals or minerals could overcome the challenges that it faced.
Being weak and at the hands of its more powerful neighbors, as the power of the empire waned, the worlds at the periphery of the empire declared independence. 
I'll let you read the novel and enjoy the details. Asimov creates a religion based on technology, then traders that use the superior technology of the Foundation for economic control.

The awesomeness of Asimov lies not in creating these concepts, but brutally subjecting them to his dissection. Most of his robot novels for example are a constant source of how best the laws of robotics could be flawed (if you read the subtext). The foundation novels are no different, Asimov would mercilessly attack psychostory in every way possible. It would narrowly escape destruction from the last strong emperor and his general Bel Riose only for the ultimate flaw in psychohistory to be painfully obvious.

## The Second Foundation and the Mule

When Seldon estabilished the foundation, he also estabilished it's twin - The second foundation. The first foundationers were technologists and the engine of the seldon plan while the second were the overseers. 
They were a group of people that had latent mentalic abilities. They could read and influence human minds and emotions.
The second foundation were the psychohistorians, they were the guardians of the plan. Psychohostorical predictions by their nature could not be known even to the first foundation. Else they would become invalid. and so the second foundation lived in secrecy and had agents in prominent locations throughout the galaxy to ensure the success of the seldon plan.
In that way, they were zealots. They were a part of the seldon plan in the sense that they would do anything to make sure it succeeded. 


Thats it for this part. maybe sometime later, i'll write about gaia and the fall of the seldon plan. But for now, go read the books. Because they sure as hell aint going to make no movies about this.

cheers.